# gapps (Google Apps)
>The easiest way to develop Google Apps Script projects from the command line.

## Requirements
  - [node v0.12.x](https://nodejs.org/download/)
  - `npm install -g gapps`

## Quickstart

### 1. Create and Save a Blank Apps Script Project

1. Head to [https://script.google.com](https://script.google.com) and create a new blank project.
2. Save the mostly empty project and give it a name.
  - Saving is important; the project is not in your Google Drive until it is saved.

### 2. Get Google Drive Credentials

You can do this one of two ways:

1. Adding Google Drive permissions to the default Developer Console Project that
  is created for each Apps Script project
2. Using an independent Developer Console Project and enabling the Google Drive
  API

#### 2.1 Exising Apps-Script-Created Dev Console Project

1. Access the automatically created apps script Developer Console Project by
  1. `Resources` > `Developers Console Project`
  2. Click on the blue link at the top (`project-name - api-project-##########`)
    to access the correct Developer Console Project
2. Enable the Google Drive API
  1. Click `APIs & auth` in the left nav and then select `APIs`
  2. Search for `Drive` and select the Google Drive API listing.
  3. Click `Enable API`
3. Acquire Google Drive Client Secret Credentials
  1. In the `Credentials` section of the `APIs & auth` group, Select
    `Create New Client ID`
  2. In the menu that appears, choose `Installed application` for the `Application type`.
    - You can leave the `Installed Application Type` field as `Other`.
  3. Click `Create Client ID`.
  4. Finally, download your credentials using the `Download as JSON` button below them.
    - Save these credentials to a location of your choosing; `~/Downloads` is fine.
  5. You may close the Developer Console window.

#### 2.2 Independent Dev Console Project

1. Use [this link](https://console.developers.google.com/start/api?id=drive&credential=client_key) to create the project.
  - That link will auto-activate the Google Drive API.
  - If you have multiple Google Accounts, append `&authuser=1` to the end of the url to choose which account to login with.
    - note that `authuser` is 0-indexed.
3. Make sure `Create a New Project` is selected and hit `Continue`.
4. Once the project has been created, click `Go to Credentials`.
5. Select `Create New Client ID`, choose the `Installed Application` type, and then click `Configure Consent Screen`.
6. Select your email address from the dropdown and assign your add-on a Project Name.
  - This can always be changed later.
7. `Save` your Consent Screen
8. In the credentials section (which you should be redirected to after the last step),
   Select `Create New Client ID`
9. In the menu that appears, choose `Installed application` for the `Application type`.
  - You can leave the `Installed Application Type` field as `Other`.
10. Click `Create Client ID`.
11. Finally, download your credentials using the `Download as JSON` button below them.
  - Save these credentials to a location of your choosing; `~/Downloads` is fine.
12. You may close the Developer Console window.
  - To return to this project later, select `Resources` > `Developer Console Project`
    while editing your script. Then click the link at the top of the dialog to open the Developer Console with this project selected.

### 3. Authenticate gapps

1. Run `gapps auth ~/Downloads/path/to/client_secret_abcd.json`
  - **i.e.** `gapps auth ~/Downloads/client_secret_1234567890-abcd.apps.googleusercontent.com.json`
  - This process will set up Google Drive authentication to allow uploading and importing of the Apps Script project.
2. Follow the directions by clicking on the link generated by the script.
3. After you're successfully authenticated, feel free to delete the `client_secret.json` credentials file.

You can pass the option `--no-launch-browser` to generate a url that will give you a code to paste back into the console.

### 4. Initialize your project

1. Run `gapps project init` within your project directory. This will create `config.json`
2. Get your project ID from the address bar, located after `/d/` and before `/edit`.
  - It should look something like `1RRks8iFLH1K9RN58Rt5RHo4-OEnUUDlPn-nN_cz4EcxK82eo2NsLb_ba`
3. Run `gapps add <deploymentId> <projectId>`
  - For example, `gapps add dev 1RRks8iFLH1K9RN58Rt5RHo4-OEnUUDlPn-nN_cz4EcxK82eo2NsLb_ba`

### 5. Upload New Files

Awesome! Now, to upload changes, run `gapps deploy <deploymentId>`.
You should then be able to reload your script and see changes.


## Best Practices

- Only upload to Google Drive and never edit files in the web IDE
  - This way the true state of the code is locally or in git and you'll never
    need to deal with issues where the states locally and remotely are not in
    sync.
  - You also get the benefits of structuring code within directories

## Docs

### gapps auth

```
  Usage: gapps auth [options] <path/to/client/secret.json>

  Authorize gapps to use the Google Drive API

  Options:

    -b, --no-launch-browser  Do not use a local webserver to capture oauth code
                              and instead require copy/paste
    -p, --port [port]        Port to use for webserver
```

Performs the authentication flow described in the quickstart above.

### gapps project init

```
  Usage: gapps project init|create [options]

  Initialize blank project. The external Apps Script project must exist.

  Options:

    -s, --subdir [subdir]
    -o, --overwrite
```

Creates `config.json`, which contains information about your apps script project.

### gapps deployment add


```
  Usage: gapps deployment add [options] <deploymentId> <fileId>

  Add a new Deployment Target

  Options:

    -k, --key [key]        Project Key
    -s, --subdir [subdir]  Subdirectory for deployment files
```

This adds entry to the `deployments` array in `config.json` containing information
regarding the id, key, location, and package dependencies of your deployment.

It's popular to have `dev`, `test`, and `prod` deployments, each linked to
different apps script projects.

This command will also create the relevant `./gapps_deployments/<deploymentId>`
folder where deployment-specific code can live.

### gapps deployment deploy

```
  Usage: gaps deployment deploy|upload [options] <deploymentId>

  Upload back to Google Drive. Run from root of project directory
```

Upload the project to Google Drive. Sources files from `./gapps_src`,
`./gapps_deployments`, and also includes any packages that the deployment
depends on.

### gapps deployment remove

```
  Usage: gapps deployment remove [options] <deploymentId>

  Remove a Deployment Target
```

Removes the deployment info from `config.json`

### gapps deployment package add

```
  Usage: gapps deployment package add [package] [options]

  Add a package to a deployment

  Options:
    -d, --deployment <deploymentId>  Which deployment to modify (defaults to all)
```

This will mark the provided package as a dependency to that deployment and
download the files to `./gapps_packages/<package>`. They will be included when
uploading to Google Drive.

### gapps deployment package update

```
  Usage: gapps deployment package update [package] [deploymentId]

  Update a package to the latest version
```

Simply re-downloads the latest version of the packages required by the deployment.

### gapps deployment oauth-callback-url

```
  Usage: gapps deployment oauth-callback-url [deployments]

  Get the OAuth Callback URL for a deployment, or all of them (default)
```

For each deployment, returns the OAuth Callback URL required by most 3rd-party
OAuth services.

## Development
Please submit any bugs to the Issues page. Pull Requests also welcome.

If you want to develop, clone down the repo and have at it! You can run
`npm link` from the root directory of the repo to symlink to your local copy.
You'll have to uninstall the production version first
`npm uninstall -g gapps`.

## Limitations

**gapps** allows you to nest files in folders, but the
Apps Script platform expects a flat file structure. Because of this,
**no files can have the same name, even if they are in separate directories**.
One file will overwrite the other, making debugging difficult.

Your add-on must be developed as a
[standalone script](https://developers.google.com/apps-script/guides/standalone)
and tested within Doc or Sheet. This means that it cannot use certain functions
of [bound scripts](https://developers.google.com/apps-script/guides/bound),
namely installable triggers. While testing within a Doc, you have access to the
"Special methods" mentioned in
[the docs](https://developers.google.com/apps-script/guides/bound), though. If
you followed the quickstart above, you should be set up correctly.

## Common Issues

The Google Drive API frequently returns a *400* error without a helpful error
message. Common causes for this are:

- **javascript formatting errors**
  - The server-side javascript code (`.js` or `.gs`) is validated upon upload.
  - If there is a syntax error, the upload will fail.
- The project does not exist yet.
  - Verify that the project exists in your Google Drive folder.
- Missing server-side libraries
  - verify that any required Libraries (frequently `Underscore` or `OAuth2`) have been added
    to the Apps Script project
- Authentication error
  - Verify that `~/.gapps` exists and has 4 values: `client_id`, `client_secret,
    `redirect_uri`, and `refresh_token`
  - To reset authentication, delete `~/.gapps` and then perform the
    authentication steps in part #2 of the quickstart again.

## Extra Resources

- [Google Apps Script Documentation](https://developers.google.com/apps-script/)
